\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename trueprint.info
@settitle Trueprint
@c %**end of header

@headings double
@include version.texi

@dircategory Miscellaneous
@direntry
* Trueprint: (trueprint).		Format & print text files on a printer
@end direntry

@setchapternewpage odd

@ifinfo
This is the documentation for GNU Trueprint

Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Free Software Foundation Inc.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@sp 10
@title Trueprint
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Lezz Giles
@author @email{giles@@world.std.com}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Free Software Foundation Inc.
@end titlepage

@node Top, Overview, , (dir)

@top Trueprint

Trueprint is a program for printing source code and other text files.

@menu
* Overview::			Trueprint in brief.
* Installing Trueprint::	How to install Trueprint.
* Languages::			How Trueprint handles source files
				for different computer languages.
* Page Formatting::             Getting the right number of pages on a sheet.
* Page Furniture::		Headers, footers and other page decorations.
* Text Formatting::		Font size, line breaks, and other text
				formatting tweaks.
* Output Options::		Sending the output to the right place.
* Print Selection::		Printing just the stuff you want.
* Miscellaneous Features::      All the stuff that doesn't belong
				anywhere else.
* Options and Environment Variables List::
				A reference list of all options.
* Option Index::		Index to options
* Concept Index::		Index to concepts throughout this manual

@end menu


@node Overview, Installing Trueprint, Top, Top
@chapter Overview

@cindex flower
@cindex smell
@cindex overview

What is Trueprint?  Trueprint is an ugly flower that smells beautiful.

Trueprint is intended to be the only printing program you will ever
need to print your program source code and other text files.  It
tries to achieve this by being simple to use, providing
powerful features, and being intelligent enough to provide those
features when you need them.

Trueprint knows about common computer languages and will select
features appropriate to each language.  For example if the language
contains functions then Trueprint will generate a function index.
And if the language contains the concept of braces then Trueprint
will include a braces depth count in the left-hand margin.

If you need to customize the appearance of the printed output then
you can use options to turn any of Trueprint's features on or off.
For example you can specify that the output be printed landscape, two-up,
using an eight-point font with line numbers.
By setting an environment variable you can create personal defaults for
Trueprint which will override the language defaults and which will
in turn be overridden by the command line options.

Trueprint knows about the printers available on your system via
a special @code{printers} file.  This file tells it how large a page
is and whether the printer is double or single sided.  Using this
information, Trueprint can format your output appropriately.

If there's anything that Trueprint doesn't do, you are welcome
to change the tool itself - just remember that it's covered by
the GPL and be sure to send a copy of the changes to
@email{enhance-trueprint@@gnu.org}!

The original author and current maintainer of trueprint is
Lezz Giles.  His email addresses at the time of writing are
@email{gilesfamily@@mediaone.net}, @email{lgiles@@avici.com},
and @email{giles@@world.std.com}.

@node Installing Trueprint, Languages, Overview, Top
@chapter Installing Trueprint

Installing Trueprint is almost as simple as installing any well-behaved
GNU program.  For details, read the README file that comes with the
package.  This section provides an overview of the process, plus
details of the @code{printers} file.

@section Installation Overview

@cindex installing
@cindex invoking make
@cindex testing the installation
@cindex make install
@cindex make test

In the simplest case, assuming you want to install trueprint into
/usr/local/bin, installing trueprint is just a matter of five
short steps:
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{./configure}
@item
@code{make}
@item
@code{make test}
@item
Update the printers file with your printer information.
@item
@code{make install}
@end itemize

If you want to change the installation root directory from
@code{/usr/local} to, for example, @code{/usr} (so that
the executable would be put into  @code{/usr/bin/trueprint}) then
just pass the new root directory to @code{./configure} using
@code{--prefix}, e.g. @code{./configure --prefix=/usr}.

If the tests fail then cd to the tests subdirectory and look
at the appropriate @code{.dif} file.  If you can't work out
what's gone wrong then report the problem to @email{bug-trueprint@@gnu.org}.

@section The @code{printers} file

@cindex printers file
@cindex printer specification
@cindex printer queues

The printers file is the most complicated part of Trueprint.
Put simply, it contains two lists: a list of printer types,
and a list of the printers at your site.  The list of printer
types is long (well, actually it's fairly short) and it should
contain the most common office printers.  The list of printers
in the distribution printers file is just a set of example
entries - you should delete these examples and replace them
with your own printer information.

An example type entry is:
@example
type:Apple Laswerwriter II:1: 15:597:784:8
@end example

The first field just specifies this as a @code{type} entry.

The second field contains the printer type name.  Whitespace
is significant, so there shouldn't be any spaces between
the start and end of the name, and the colons.  The third
field is 1 for a single-sided printer and 2 for a double-sided
printer.  The final four fields give the left, right, top and
bottom margins respectively in points from the bottom left
corner of the paper; more specifically they are the coordinates
of the bounding box that the postscript engine on the printer
can print in.

The first three fields are typically easy to fill in; however
the final four fields need to be calculated for each printer
type.  Fortunately the postscript interpreter knows what
the coordinates are - it's just a matter of asking it nicely,
and the file @code{testprint} contains a little postscript
program that will do just that.  If you print @code{testprint}
using either @code{lpr} or @code{lp} then it will print out
the four numbers needed in the @code{printers} file (on the
other hand, if it simply prints the contents of the file then
either your printer is not configured properly or it isn't
a postscript printer - you'll need to rectify the situation
before you can use Trueprint on that printer).

The second half of the file contains printer entries, for example:
@example
printer:pr2-simp:HP Laserjet 8000 simplex
@end example

Once again, the first entry simply specifies that this is
a @code{printer} entry.  The second entry contains the printer
queue name as known to your operating system (i.e. the value
you would pass to @code{lp} or @code{lpr}).  The third field
contains the appropriate printer type name; once again whitespace
is important so make sure there are no trailing space or tab
characters at the end of the line.

If you have two queues set up to one printer, one for single-sided
output and one for double-sided output, simply set up two
printer types.  Similarly if you have multiple queues for the
same printer for different paper sizes.

@node Languages, Page Formatting, Installing Trueprint, Top
@chapter Languages

@cindex languages
@cindex language defaults
@cindex c language
@cindex verilog
@cindex c++
@cindex shell
@cindex pascal
@cindex perl
@cindex java
@cindex plain text
@cindex pseudo C
@cindex listing files
@cindex report format
@cindex filename extensions

Different programming languages have different features and look
their best with different formats.  Since Trueprint tries to be all
things to all people, it understands a number of different languages
and tries to accomodate all of them.  In this version Trueprint
understands:
@itemize @bullet
@item
C
@item
Verilog
@item
C++
@item
Shell
@item
Pascal
@item
Perl
@item
Java
@end itemize

It also understands some other formats:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Plain text
@item
Pseudo C
@item
Listing files
@item
A special format called "report format"
@end itemize

Not all of the languages are fully supported.  C is well supported,
but Java is only minimally supported.  The language support is
implemented in the @code{lang_*.c} files - if you're not happy
with the level of support for your favorite language just improve -
or add - it!

@findex language
There are a couple of ways that Trueprint can find out what
type of language a file contains.  It can look at the filename
suffix, or it can be told using the @code{--language} option.
The details are:

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .2 .6
@item @emph{Language} @tab @emph{suffix} @tab @emph{--language option}
@item C @tab .c .h @tab --language=c
@item Verilog @tab .v @tab --language=v
@item C++ @tab .cxx .cpp .cc .C .hpp .H @tab --language=cxx
@item Shell @tab .sh @tab --language=sh
@item Pascal @tab .pas @tab --language=pascal
@item Perl @tab .pl @tab --language=perl
@item Java @tab .java @tab --language=java
@item Plain text @tab default @tab --language=text
@item Pseudo C @tab .pc .ph @tab --language=pseudoc
@item Listing @tab .lst @tab --language=list
@item Report format @tab .rep @tab --language=report
@end multitable

For most of the languages, Trueprint uses the language to
work out where comments are (so it can print them in italics) and
where the function names are (so it can print them in bold and include
them in the function index).  However there are some special features
for some of the languages:

Pseudo C is like C, except it has a more forgiving syntax.  In particular
it ignores strings, so if you leave off a closing quote then pseudo C
will print out using a vaguely sensible format.  Pseudo C is intended
for printing code that doesn't yet compile.

Listing format assumes very wide lines and a fixed page length of
sixty-six characters, so it turns off line-wrap and sets the page
length appropriately.

Report format uses a few special characters: anything between
^A and ^E is printed in bold and included in the function index,
and anything between a pair of ^Cs is printed in italics.

@node Page Formatting, Page Furniture, Languages, Top
@chapter Page Formatting

@cindex page formatting
@cindex portrait
@cindex landscape
@cindex single-sided
@cindex double-sided
@cindex one-up
@cindex two-up
@cindex two-up with small font
@cindex four-up
@cindex holepunch
@cindex holepunch at top of page
@cindex top holepunch

There are a few options that you can use to adjust the overall
page formatting.  Most of these options are pretty self-explanatory.

@findex portrait
@findex landscape
For portrait printing use @code{--portrait}, and for landscape printing
use @code{--landscape}.

@findex single-sided
@findex double-sided
To force the printer to print single-sided use @code{--single-sided},
and to try to force double-sided printing use @code{--double-sided}. 
These options also affect headers and footers, so forcing @code{--double-sided}
on a single-sided printer will result in odd-looking headers and footers.
Also since Trueprint tries to start each file on a new sheet of paper,
specifying @code{--double-sided} forces occasional pages with no content.

@findex one-up
@findex two-up
@findex two-tall-up
@findex four-up
To print one page of output on one physical sheet, the default,
use @code{--one-up}.  To print two-up, i.e. two logical pages on
one sheet (side-by-side for portrait or one over the other for
landscape) use @code{--two-up}.  And to print four logical pages
on each sheet (and to help ruin your eyesight!) use @code{--four-up}.
There is another mode called @code{two-tall-up} which prints two
logical pages on each sheet at four-up pointsize - for portrait format
each logical page is very tall and narrow, and for landscape format
each logical page is very wide.

@findex holepunch
@findex no-holepunch
@findex top-holepunch
@findex no-top-holepunch
To leave a gap down the left-hand-side of each physical page so that
you can punch holes in the page without punching out any information,
use @code{--holepunch}, and to leave a gap at the top of the page
(if you want to punch holes at the top) use @code{--top-holepunch}.
Options @code{--no-holepunch} and @code{no-top-holepunch} exist to
override these if they've been set up as defaults.

@node Page Furniture, Text Formatting, Page Formatting, Top
@chapter Page Furniture

@cindex page furniture
@cindex line numbers
@cindex braces depth
@cindex indentation
@cindex nostalgia
@cindex gray bands

Page furniture refers to the bits and pieces scattered around the
edge of each page.  It includes things like headers and footers,
line numbers, and so on.

@findex line-numbers
@findex no-line-numbers
@findex braces-depth
@findex no-braces-depth
The left-hand side of each page can include two columns of information:
line numbers and a count of the current braces depth.  Line numbers
are normally included, but they can be forced on with @code{--line-numbers}
and forced off with @code{--no-line-numbers}.  The braces depth count
is normally only turned on for languages that have the concept of
braces (e.g. C or Java); it can be explicitly turned on with
@code{--braces-depth} or it can be turned off with @code{--no-braces-depth}.

@findex gray-bands
@findex no-gray-bands
If you are nostalgic for the old line-printer paper with gray or
green bands running across each page you can turn this on with
@code{--gray-bands @var{number}} where @var{number} is the width
of the bands.  For example @code{--gray-bands 3} would print light
gray bands three lines deep all the way down the page.  Naturally
you can force this off with @code{--no-gray-bands}.

@section Headers and Footers

@cindex headers
@cindex footers
@cindex message string
@cindex string format characters
@cindex header string format
@cindex footer string format
@cindex message string format

@findex left-header
@findex center-header
@findex right-header
@findex left-footer
@findex center-footer
@findex right-footer
@findex headers
@findex footers
@findex no-headers
@findex no-footers
Headers and footers are printed in boxes at the top and bottom of
each page.  There are three header strings and three footer strings,
and each can be a mixture of constant strings or % escapes.  The
strings are set with @code{--left-header=@var{string}}, @code{--center-header=@var{string}}, 
@code{--right-header=@var{string}}, @code{--left-footer=@var{string}}, @code{--center-footer=@var{string}},
and @code{--right-footer=@var{string}}.  If you want to turn off either headers
or footers you can use @code{--no-headers} or @code{--no-footers},
and of course you can force them on with @code{--headers} and
@code{--footers}.

If you're printing double-sided then the left and right headers and
footers are swapped on every second page.

@findex page-furniture-lines
@findex no-page-furniture-lines
Normally headers and footers have a line drawn around them and a line is
also drawn down the left side of each page.  By
specifying @code{--no-page-furniture-lines} these lines are not
drawn.  In fact if you turn off headers, footers, line count and braces
depth then no page furniture will be drawn at all, i.e.
@code{--no-page-furniture-lines --no-headers --no-footers --no-braces-depth --no-line-numbers}.

@findex message
There is also an optional message string that is printed across
the middle of each page in a very large, light gray font.  You
can use this message to say things like @samp{draft} or @samp{top secret}.
Use @code{--message=@var{string}} to set the message.

There are quite a few % escapes that you can use inside the
header, footer and message strings:

@table @code
@item %%
Print a simple %.

@item %m
Print the current month of the year as a number, e.g. 05.

@item %d
Print the current day of the month, e.g. 01.

@item %y
Print the current year, e.g. 1999

@item %D
Print the date in the format mm/dd/yy.

@item %L
Print the date and time in long format, e.g. Fri Oct 8 11:49:51 1999

@item %c
Print the last modified date of the current file in the format mm/dd/yy.

@item %C
Print the last modified date and time of the current file in long
format, e.g. Fri Oct 8 11:49:51 1999

@item %H
Print the current hour.

@item %M
Print the current minute.

@item %S
Print the current second.

@item %T
Print the time in the format HH:MM:SS.

@item %j
Print the day of the year, e.g. 095.

@item %w
Print the day of the week, e.g. Sunday.

@item %a
Print the abbreviated day of the week, e.g. Sun.

@item %h
Print the abbreviated month name, e.g. Mar.

@item %r
Print the time in am/pm notation, e.g. 10:45pm.

@item %p
Print the page number in the current file.

@item %P
Print the overall page number.

@item %f
Print the total number of pages of the current file.

@item %F
Print the total number of pages.

@item %n
Print the current filename.

@item %N
Print the current function name.

@item %l
Print the username of the current user.
@end table

The default strings are:

@multitable {@code{center-header}} {@code{Page %P of %Flskdfj}}
@item @code{left-header} @tab @code{%L}
@item @code{center-header} @tab @code{%N}
@item @code{right-header} @tab @code{Page %P of %F}
@item @code{left-footer} @tab @code{%L}
@item @code{center-footer} @tab @code{%n %p}
@item @code{right-footer} @tab @code{Page %P of %F}
@end multitable

@node Text Formatting, Output Options, Page Furniture, Top
@chapter Text Formatting

@cindex text formatting
@cindex format

@section Page breaks

@cindex page breaks
@cindex formfeed character
@cindex function page breaks
@cindex page breaks after functions
@cindex control-L

There are three places that Trueprint can include page breaks: at the
end of a function (assuming the current language has functions),
when it finds a form-feed character (control-L), and at the end
of each file.

@findex page-break-after-function
@findex no-page-break-after-function
To force on page breaks at the end of functions use
@code{--page-break-after-function}.  The default
behaviour, to not break the page at the end of
a function, can be forced with
@code{--no-page-break-after-function}.

@findex new-sheet-after-file
Normally Trueprint will print each file on a seperate sheet of
paper; however if you're printing a lot of small files four-up
on a duplex printer then this can waste a lot of paper.  Use
@code{--no-new-sheet-after-file} to tell Trueprint to just
start a new page at the end of a file.  This option has no
effect for one-up output.

@findex form-feeds
@findex ignore-form-feeds
You can force Trueprint to expand form-feeds to a new page
with @code{--form-feeds} and, of course, you can turn it off
with @code{--ignore-form-feeds}.

@section Line wrap

@cindex line wrap
@cindex intelligent line wrap
@cindex line breaks

@findex line-wrap
@findex no-line-wrap
@findex intelligent-line-wrap
@findex no-intelligent-line-wrap
@findex minimum-line-length
By default Trueprint will wrap lines that are too long for the
page.  It will try to break the lines at intelligent locations,
for example at a space character, and it will print the remainder
of the line right-justified.  If you don't like this then you
can turn off line-wrap with @code{--no-line-wrap}, or you can
set the line-wrap column explicitly with @code{--line-wrap=@var{column}}.
You can also tell Trueprint to wrap lines at exactly a specific
column, i.e. to stop trying to be clever, with
@code{--no-intelligent-line-wrap}.  Of course you can force the
feature on with @code{--intelligent-line-wrap}.  And if you want
to use intelligent line-wrap but you want to ensure that you don't
end up with incredibly short lines then you can set the minimum
line length with @code{--minimum-line-length=@var{number}}.

@section Page length and pointsize

@cindex page length
@cindex pointsize
@cindex text size
@cindex leading
@cindex line gap
@cindex page length

@findex pointsize
The default pointsize used by Trueprint is 10.  Of course, this
is reduced appropriately if you're printing two-up or four-up.
You can set the pointsize explicitly with @code{--pointsize=@var{number}},
although bear in mind that the pointsize will still be scaled down
for two-up or four-up.

@findex leading
In the old days of printing, strips of lead were used to seperate
the lines of text.  If you wanted more seperation you included
more strips of lead.  Trueprint is nothing if not traditional.
The default leading (pronounced @samp{ledding}) is one point, but
you can increase (or decrease) it with @code{--leading=@var{number}}.
Not suprisingly you can't specify a negative number.

@findex page-length
You can set the overall page length with @code{--page-length=@var{length}}.
Trueprint will set the point size appropriately.  Unfortunately, since
there are a limited number of pointsizes that Trueprint can chose from
(e.g. it can't select 8.35), using this option may result in a blank
space at the bottom of each page.  This option is best used if your
file naturally breaks into pages of a specific length.  You may
also want to turn off line-wrap so that long lines don't mess up
your carefully formatted output.

@section Tab size

@cindex tab size
@findex tabsize
The default tab size is eight characters.  If this eats up too
many columns for you, then you can set it with @code{--tabsize=@var{number}}.

@node Output Options, Print Selection, Text Formatting, Top
@chapter Output Options

@cindex output
@cindex printer destination
@cindex $PRINTER
@cindex lp
@cindex lpr
@cindex printing multiple copies
@cindex copies
@cindex postscript
@cindex saving postscript
@cindex file output
@cindex output file

@findex printer
By default Trueprint will simply send the postscript output to @code{lp}
or @code{lpr} (depending on the ancestry of your version of Unix), and
it will explicitly set the destination to the value of the environment
variable @code{$PRINTER}.  You can use @code{--printer=@var{printer}} to
send the print job to another printer.  If you like @code{lp} options
then you can also say @code{-P @var{printer}}, or if you are a fan of
System V then you can say @code{-d @var{printer}} (almost every
Trueprint option has a single-character equivalent - I only mention
these two explicitly because they are used exactly the same way as
the options to @code{lpr} and @code{lp}).

@findex copies
If you want to print multiple copies then just use
@code{--copies=@var{number}}.

@findex output
@findex redirect
If you want to save the postscript output then you can redirect
it to a file using @code{--output=@var{filename}}.  If you use
@code{-} for the filename then the postscript will be sent to stdout.
If you use @code{--redirect-output} then the output will be sent
to a file named after the first parameter with the suffix @code{.ps}.
The @code{--redirect-output} option overrides the @code{--output=@var{filename}}
option, and of course there is a @code{--no-redirect-output} option
to turn it off.

@node Print Selection, Miscellaneous Features, Output Options, Top
@chapter Print Selection

@cindex cover sheet
@cindex file index
@cindex function index
@cindex body
@cindex selecting pages to print

A Trueprint print job can contain a reasonably long list of pages:
@itemize @bullet
@item
A cover sheet,
@item
a file index,
@item
a function index,
@item
and the files.
@end itemize

Each of these can be explicitly disabled or enabled:

@findex function-index
@findex no-function-index
@findex file-index
@findex no-file-index
@findex cover-sheet
@findex no-cover-sheet
@findex print-body
@findex no-print-body
@multitable @columnfractions .5 .5
@item @code{--no-cover-sheet} @tab @code{--cover-sheet}
@item @code{--no-file-index} @tab @code{--file-index}
@item @code{--no-function-index} @tab @code{--function-index}
@item @code{--no-print-body} @tab @code{--print-body}
@end multitable

@findex print-pages
In addition there is a mechanism for printing only a subset of
the pages, by using @code{--print-pages=@var{selection}}, where
selection consists of a comma-seperated list of page selections:

@table @code
@item @var{number}
Print the specific page.

@item @var{number}-@var{number}
Print all pages between, and including, the specified pages.

@item @var{function-name}
Print all pages that include @var{function-name}.

@item d
Print all pages that have changed (this is only useful with the @code{--diff}
(@pxref{Miscellaneous Features}) option.

@item D
Print all pages containing functions that have changed (this is only useful
with the @code{--diff} (@pxref{Miscellaneous Features}) option.

@item f
Print the function index.

@item F
Print the file index.

@end table

For example, @code{--print-pages=1-5,main,f} will print the function index,
pages 1 to 5, and all the pages for the function @code{main}.

@findex prompt
If you specify @code{--prompt} then Trueprint will prompt you for each
page, whether or not it should print that page.  It will give you
information such as the current filename, current functionname, page
number, and so on.  The possible responses are:

@table @code
@item y
Print this page.

@item y@var{number}
Print @var{number} pages.

@item y*
Print all the remaining pages.

@item n
Skip this page

@item n@var{number}
Skip @var{number} pages.

@item n*
Skip all the remaining pages.

@item p@var{selection}
Print all remaining pages that match @var{selection}, where @var{selection}
is in the format defined above.

@item ?
Print a help message.

@end table

@findex no-prompt
Of course, you can force the prompting feature off with @code{--no-prompt}.

@node Miscellaneous Features, Options and Environment Variables List, Print Selection, Top
@chapter Miscellaneous Features
@section Diff-marking

@cindex diff
@cindex comparing with old version
@cindex marking differences

One of the more obscure but more useful features of Trueprint is
the ability to highlight differences between two versions of sets of
files.  Added lines are shown in bold, while deleted lines are
shown struck-out.

@findex diff
You specify the old version of the file or files with
@code{--diff=@var{pathname}}.  If @var{pathname} suffixed with
the current filename is a valid file then the differences
between @var{pathname}/@var{filename} are displayed.
Alternatively, if @var{pathname} is a file and you're
printing one file, then the differences between @var{pathname} and
the current file are displayed.

Some examples:

@example
trueprint --diff=../old- this.c that.c
@end example

will print the differences between ../old-this.c and this.c, and
../old-that.c and that.c.

@example
trueprint --diff=../old/ this.c that.c
@end example

will print the differences between ../old/this.c and this.c, and
../old/that.c and that.c.  Note that the trailing / is important.

@example
trueprint --diff=this.c that.c
@end example

will print the differences between this.c and that.c.

@section Help and Version Information

@cindex help messages
@cindex version information

@findex help
Use @code{--help} for general on-line help information.  If you give the
@code{--help} option a parameter it will give you more detailed information
about a specific area - use @code{--help} for a list of the areas.

@findex version
Use @code{--version} to see the current version of Trueprint.

@section Setting personal defaults

@cindex default options
@cindex personal defaults
@cindex setting defaults

When Trueprint starts it uses four sets of options:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Hard-coded defaults.
@item
Language-specific defaults.
@item
Options taken from the environment variable @code{$TP_OPTS}.
@item
Command-line options.
@end itemize

Each set of options overrides the earlier sets, so command-line
options override all other sets.

If you want to set some personal default options, then simply set
the environment variable @code{$TP_OPTS}.

@section Postscript level

@cindex postscript level
It is possible to request that trueprint generate level 1 or
level 2 postscript. Level 2 is the default.  If level 2 is
set then trueprint will send the appropriate instructions
to select the proper paper size.  You shouldn't normally need
to use this option.  To select postscript level 1 use
@code{--ps-level-one} and to select postscript level 2 use
@code{--ps-level-two}.  In the future this option may be
used to turn on more features.

@section Environment Information

@cindex environment variables
@findex ignore-environment
@findex use-environment
By default Trueprint uses environment variables and the current username.
You can force it to ignore these by using @code{--ignore-environment}.
In practice this is only used when running the tests during installation.
For the sake of completeness there is an option @code{--use-environment}.

@section Debugging

@cindex debugging
@findex debug
Trueprint has built-in debugging messages that can be useful for
tracking down problems.  The debugging messages are turned on with
@code{--debug=@var{string}}, where @var{string} is a series of
letter/digit pairs.  Each letter turns on a set of debugging messages,
and the corresponding digit indicates the level of messages, with 1
indicating the least number of messags and 9 turning on all messages.
The letter @code{@@} can be used to turn on all areas, so @code{--debug=@@9}
will turn on all messages.  Use @code{--help=debug} for details of
what letters turn on what areas.  Note that this feature is not
uniformly implemented - messages were only typically added where they
were needed.  Also note that messages will not be generated in code
prior to the code that sets the debug string!

@node Options and Environment Variables List, Option Index, Miscellaneous Features, Top

@chapter Options and Environment Variables

@section Miscellaneous options

@table @code
@item -D
@itemx --debug=@var{string}
set debug options to @var{string}

@item -O @var{string}
@itemx --diff=@var{string}
if @var{string} is a file then print diffs between @var{string} and input file
otherwise use as a prefix and print diffs

@item -t @var{string}
@itemx --language=@var{string}
treat input as language.  Use --help languages for list.

@item -U @var{string}
@itemx --username=@var{string}
set username for coversheet

@item -H
@itemx --help
Type help information

@item --help=@var{string}
Type specific help information.  Use @code{--help} for a list of possible
@var{string}s.

@item -V
@itemx --version
Type version information

@item -N
@itemx --use-environment
use environment variables

@item --N
@itemx --ignore-environment
don't use values from environment, such as time,
@code{$USER}, etc.  This is for test purposes, to make test results
more reproducible.

@end table

@section Page furniture options
@table @code
@item -X @var{string}
@itemx --left-header=@var{string}
Specify string for left side of header.

@item -x @var{string}
@itemx --left-footer=@var{string}
Specify string for left side of footer.

@item -Y @var{string}
@itemx --center-header=@var{string}
Specify string for center of header.

@item -y @var{string}
@itemx --center-footer=@var{string}
Specify string for center of footer.

@item -Z @var{string}
@itemx --right-header=@var{string}
Specify string for right side of header.

@item -z @var{string}
@itemx --right-footer=@var{string}
Specify string for right side of footer.

@item -m @var{string}
@itemx --message=@var{string}
Message to be printed over page.

@item -G @var{number}
@itemx --gray-bands=@var{number}
Emulate the old lineprinter paper with gray bands
across each page.  The value of @var{number} gives the width of
the bands and the gaps between them.

@item -K
@itemx --headers
Include the header on each page.

@item --K
@itemx --no-headers
Suppress the header on each page.

@item -k
@itemx --footers
Include the footer on each page.

@item --k
@itemx --no-footers
Suppress the footer on each page.

@item -i
@itemx --no-braces-depth
Exclude the braces depth count.

@item --i
@itemx --braces-depth
Include the braces depth count.

@item -n
@itemx --no-line-numbers
Exclude the line number count.

@item --n
@itemx --line-numbers
Include the line number count.

@end table

@section Text formatting options
@table @code
@item -b
@itemx --no-page-break-after-function
Don't print page breaks at the end of functions.

@item --b
@itemx --page-break-after-function
Print page breaks at the end of functions.

@item --new-sheet-after-file
Print each file on a new sheet of paper.

@item --no-new-sheet-after-file
Don't print each file on a new sheet of paper.  This
option will still insert a page break at the end of
a file, but it won't force the new file on to a new
sheet of paper.

@item -W
@itemx --no-intelligent-line-wrap
Wrap lines at exactly the line-wrap column.

@item --W
@itemx --intelligent-line-wrap
Wrap lines intelligently at significant characters, such
as a space

@item -T @var{number}
@itemx --tabsize=@var{number}
Set tabsize (default 8).

@item -E
@itemx --ignore-form-feeds
Don't expand form feed characters to new page.

@item --E
@itemx --form-feeds
Expand form feed characters to new page.

@item -p @var{number}
@itemx --point-size=@var{number}
Specify point size (default 10).

@item -g @var{number}
@itemx --leading=@var{number}
Specify interline gap in points (default 1).

@item -w @var{number}
@itemx --line-wrap=@var{number}
Specify the line-wrap column.

@item --no-line-wrap
Turn off line-wrap.

@item -l @var{number}
@itemx --page-length=@var{number}
Specify number of lines on a page, point size is
calculated appropriately.

@end table

@section Print selection options
@table @code
@item -C
@itemx --no-cover-sheet
Don't print cover sheet.

@item --C
@itemx --cover-sheet
Print cover sheet.

@item -A @var{string}
@itemx --print-pages=@var{string}
Specify list of pages to be printed.

@item -a
@itemx --no-prompt
Don't prompt for each page, whether it should be printed or not.

@item --a
@itemx --prompt
Prompt for each page, whether it should be printed or not.

@item -F
@itemx --no-file-index
Don't print file index.

@item --F
@itemx --file-index
Print file index.

@item -f
@itemx --no-function-index
Don't print function index.

@item --f
@itemx --function-index
Print function index.

@item -B
@itemx --no-print-body
Don't print body of text.

@item --B
@itemx --print-body
Print body of text.

@end table

@section Page format options
@table @code
@item -I
@itemx --no-holepunch
Don't leave space for holepunch at the side of each page.

@item --I
@itemx --holepunch
Leave space for holepunch at the side of each page.

@item -J
@itemx --no-top-holepunch
Don't leave space for holepunch at the top of each page.

@item --J
@itemx --top-holepunch
Leave space for holepunch at the top of each page.

@item -o p
@itemx --portrait
Print using portrait orientation.

@item -o l
@itemx --landscape
Print using landscape orientation.

@item -S 1
@itemx --single-sided
Print single-sided.

@item -S 2
@itemx --double-sided
Print double-sided.

@item -1
@itemx --one-up
Print 1-on-1 (default).

@item -2
@itemx --two-up
Print 2-on-1.

@item -3
@itemx --two-tall-up
Print 2-on-1 at 4-on-1 pointsize.

@item -4
@itemx --four-up
Print 4-on-1.

@end table

@section Output options
@table @code
@item -d @var{string}
@itemx --printer=@var{string}
Use printer @var{string}.

@item -P @var{string}
@itemx --printer=@var{string}
Use printer @var{string}.

@item -s @var{string}
@itemx --output=@var{string}
Send output to filename @var{string}; use - for stdout.

@item -c @var{number}
@itemx --copies=@var{number}
Specify number of copies to be printed.

@end table

@section Environment Variables

@subsection TP_OPTS
Specify options.  These options override any default options including
language defaults, but are overridden by command line options.

@subsection TP_DIFF_CMD
Specify the diff command to be used.  The command must produce output
in the same format as the classic Unix diff.  This variable can be used
to add flags to the diff command used, for example to make diff ignore
whitespace.

@subsection TP_PRINT_CMD
Specify the print command.  The default is lpr.  If this is set then it
should be set to a command that takes standard input.  If this is set
then the destination and number of copies have no effect, i.e. there is
no mechanism to pass these values to your print command.  If you set
this to /bin/cat then the postscript output will appear on stdout.

@subsection TP_PRINTERS_FILE
Specify the printers file.  The default is the printers file that
was initially configured when trueprint was installed.  This can
be used to test out a new printers file.

@node Option Index, Concept Index, Options and Environment Variables List, Top
@unnumbered Option Index

@printindex fn

@node Concept Index,  , Option Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@summarycontents
@contents
@bye
